Add ping spec (#473)
libp2p/specs: ping/ping.md

# Ping <!-- omit in toc -->

| Lifecycle Stage | Maturity                 | Status | Latest Revision |
| --------------- | ------------------------ | ------ | --------------- |
| 1A              | Candidate Recommendation | Active | r0, 2022-11-04  |

Authors: [@marcopolo]

Interest Group: [@marcopolo], [@mxinden], [@marten-seemann]

[@marcopolo]: https://github.com/mxinden
[@mxinden]: https://github.com/mxinden
[@marten-seemann]: https://github.com/marten-seemann

# Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->
- [Protocol](#protocol)
- [Diagram](#diagram)

# Protocol

> The ping protocol is a simple request response protocol. The client sends a
> payload of 32 random bytes, and the server responds with the same 32 bytes. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ping protocol is a simple request response protocol. The client opens a stream, sends a
payload of 32 random bytes, and the server responds with the same 32 bytes on that stream. The
```

What do you think of making the stream lifecycle more explicit?

client then measures the RTT from the time it wrote the bytes to the time it

> received the bytes. The client may repeat the process by sending another payload

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
received the bytes. The client MAY repeat the process by sending another payload
```

> with random bytes, so the server _should_ loop and echo the next payload. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with random bytes, so the server SHOULD loop and echo the next payload. The
```

> with random bytes, so the server _should_ loop and echo the next payload. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with random bytes on the same stream, so the server _should_ loop and echo the next payload. The
```

> client may close the write side of the stream after sending a payload, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
client SHOULD close the write side of the stream after sending the last payload, and the
```

> server _should_ finish writing the echoed payload and then exit the loop and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
server SHOULD finish writing the echoed payload and then exit the loop and
```

close the stream.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The client MUST NOT open more than one outbound stream for the ping protocol.
```

How about making it explicit that the client only opens one stream at a time?

Unfortunately cross stream behavior is not linearizable for client and server. In other words, the client closing stream A and then opening stream B, might be perceived by the server as the client opening stream B and then closing stream A.

Still, I think the suggestion above allows the server to limit the amount of inbound streams to a small number, e.g. 2 and thus prevent DOS attacks where the client opens a large amount of ping streams.

What do folks think?

Author: Maybe this would be useful for testing multiple streams? e.g. I would like to measure the latency of N parallel streams doing a ping to smoke test my stream muxer implementation.

I agree on a bound, but maybe we can make the bound higher, like 64 streams.

Author: Thinking about this some more, I don’t think we need to support he testing use case here. For that we can have a separate testing protocol that can test things more precisely.

Agree on having this bound being 2 then.

# Ping <!-- omit in toc -->

| Lifecycle Stage | Maturity                 | Status | Latest Revision |
| --------------- | ------------------------ | ------ | --------------- |
| 3A              | Recommendation | Active | r0, 2022-11-04  |

Authors: [@marcopolo]

Interest Group: [@marcopolo], [@mxinden], [@marten-seemann]

[@marcopolo]: https://github.com/mxinden
[@mxinden]: https://github.com/mxinden
[@marten-seemann]: https://github.com/marten-seemann

# Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->
- [Protocol](#protocol)
- [Diagram](#diagram)

# Protocol

The ping protocol is a simple request response protocol. The client opens a
stream, sends a payload of 32 random bytes, and the server responds with the
same 32 bytes on that stream. The client then measures the RTT from the time it
wrote the bytes to the time it received the bytes. The client MAY repeat the
process by sending another payload with random bytes on the same stream, so the
server SHOULD loop and echo the next payload. The client SHOULD close the write

> side of the stream after sending the last payload, and the server SHOULD finish

Reviewer 3: Why is it "SHOULD" rather than "MUST"?

If the server is allowed to not respond to pings (which is implied by the usage of "SHOULD"), then the protocol is pretty useless.

Of course, the client should be aware of the fact that the server can in practice do something else than this text says, but this is off-topic for a specification. The word "MUST" implicitly means "MUST ... in order to comply to this specification". The fact that you might be connected to a peer that doesn't conform to the specification is obvious and implied, and doesn't need to be mentioned in the specification.

writing the echoed payload and then exit the loop and close the stream.

The client MUST NOT keep more than one outbound stream for the ping protocol per
peer. The server SHOULD accept at most 2 streams per peer since cross stream
behavior is not linearizable for client and server. In other words, the client
closing stream A and then opening stream B, might be perceived by the server as

> the client opening stream B and then closing stream A.

Reviewer 4: So for instance

```
The server SHOULD wait 200 milliseconds after a ping before accepting another ping a stream.
The client MUST wait 400 milliseconds after a reply to ping the server again on a stream.
```

(or make it global instead of per stream, idk)

200ms of margin to allow for jitter at the networking & scheduler level. This is less elegant than just one request per stream, but what can we do. If your ping suddently goes from 500s to 100ms (for instance if the cpu is clogged up), you will have erroneous values for one ping.

Author: Why? This isn’t DOS mitigation. If you’re worried about rate limiting a 32byte response, then you probably want to do something at a higher level (rate limiting all streams and connections for example).
